Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-018-9581-z
 ORIGINAL PAPER
‘‘My Heart Die in Me’’: Idioms of Distress
and the Development of a Screening Tool for Mental
Suffering in Southeast Liberia
Katrin Fabian1,2 • Josiah Fannoh2,3 • George G. Washington3                          •
Wilfred B. Geninyan2,3 • Bethuel Nyachienga2 • Garmai Cyrus2                         •
Joyce N. Hallowanger4 • Jason Beste1,5,6 • Deepa Rao1 •
Bradley H. Wagenaar1,2,7
Published online: 4 May 2018
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2018
Abstract The integration of culturally salient idioms of distress into mental
healthcare delivery is essential for effective screening, diagnosis, and treatment.
This study systematically explored idioms, explanatory models, and conceptual-
izations in Maryland County, Liberia to develop a culturally-resonant screening tool
for mental distress. We employed a sequential mixed-methods process of: (1) free-
lists and semi-structured interviews (n = 20); patient chart reviews (n = 315); (2)
pile-sort exercises, (n = 31); and (3) confirmatory focus group discussions (FGDs);
(n = 3) from June to December 2017. Free-lists identified 64 idioms of distress, 36
of which were eliminated because they were poorly understood, stigmatizing,
irrelevant, or redundant. The remaining 28 terms were used in pile-sort exercises to
visualize the interrelatedness of idioms. Confirmatory FDGs occurred before and
after the pile-sort exercise to explain findings. Four categories of idioms resulted,
the most substantial of which included terms related to the heart and to the
brain/mind. The final screening tool took into account 11 idioms and 6 physical
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article (https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-
018-9581-z) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users.
& Katrin Fabian
     katrin.fabian@gmail.com
1
     Department of Global Health, University of Washington, 1959 NE Pacific Street, Seattle,
     WA 98195, USA
2
     Partners in Health, Monrovia, Liberia
3
     Tubman University, Harper, Liberia
4
     Mental Health Program, Ministry of Health, Harper, Liberia
5
     Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
6
     Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
7
     Health Alliance International, Seattle, WA, USA
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                             685
symptoms extracted from patient chart reviews. This study provides the framework
for culturally resonant mental healthcare by cataloguing language around mental
distress and designing an emic screening tool for validation in a clinical setting.
Keywords Idioms of distress  Liberia  Screening tool development 
Culture and psychiatry  Mental health
Introduction
Providing adequate mental healthcare in non-Western low-resource settings requires
understanding culturally salient expressions of mental suffering and how such
expressions manifest in various contexts. While translating DSM or ICD-based
screening tools to reflect local languages provides a modicum of cultural
representation, this etic approach often fails to capture the unique expressions of
mental suffering that occur within non-Western cultures (Kaiser et al. 2015b;
Kleinman 1987). In Haiti, for instance, locally-developed screening tools that
incorporated idioms of distress were associated with better specificity and cultural
equivalence than screening tools that were directly translated from English to
Haitian Kreyól (Kaiser et al. 2013). The problematic imposition of Western
conceptualizations of mental illness on non-Western cultures perpetuates paternalist
and neo-colonial practices that exclude local ideologies at the expense of those
suffering from mental distress. A growing body of research acknowledges the
subjectivity of the presentation and conceptualization of mental ill-health and calls
for emic research that understands non-Western explanatory models and forms
screening tools and diagnostic frameworks from local concepts (Summerfield 2008;
Kaiser et al. 2014; Weaver 2017). Incorporating local idioms of mental distress into
mental healthcare and psychiatric treatment has become an increasingly well-
recognized way of prioritizing local perspectives and grassroots mental health
research as well as providing culturally sensitive care in non-Western contexts.
   In many non-Western settings, the terms ‘‘anxiety’’ and ‘‘depression’’ have no
direct equivalences in local languages and are not well recognized by people who
have had little exposure to Western medical training or formalized education
(Sweetland, Belkin, and Verdeli 2014). Psychiatric categories based on biomedical
models oversimplify the nuances of language that describe the breadth of
experiences associated with mental suffering and potentially fail to identify many
who could benefit from treatment (Summerfield 2012). Psychiatry, which unlike
other medical professions, requires diagnostics based on symptoms that differ
between cultures rather than on biomarkers or lab tests, has the potential to provide
an avenue for more culturally resonant clinical encounters through understanding
local communications of mental distress (Keys et al. 2012; Haroz et al. 2017;
Kirmayer 2001). Research has shown that explanatory models rooted in non-
medical practices and beliefs are not anathema to biomedical explanations for
mental illness, but rather provide an opportunity for collaborative treatment
pathways that value local knowledge (Khoury et al. 2012). Furthermore, neglecting
to acknowledge locally-resonant etiologies can reinforce the false dichotomy
                                                                            123

686                                                   Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
between biomedical and traditional practices. Ideally, understanding a particular
culture’s articulation of mental distress can inform medical practices built from
local ideologies in which patients can see their culture and belief system reflected.
Especially in rural areas in sub-Saharan Africa, where somatic symptoms are
strongly associated with mental distress (Quarshie 2006), healthcare environments
that utilize open communication about symptoms associated with mental distress
and their social context can provide a deeper understanding and more holistic view
of these conditions.
   Early ethnographic explorations of idioms of mental distress in non-Western
contexts have evolved to a more nuanced discussion of the relationships between
expressions of mental suffering and the broader social, cultural, religious, and
political context. The term ‘‘idioms of distress’’ refers to culturally specific
expressions of suffering, which occur in populations worldwide, as all mental
distress is influenced by culture and context. A significant body of work has been
compiled regarding idioms of distress in sub-Saharan Africa. The term kufungisisa
in Zambia and South Africa was identified as symptomatic of mental distress as well
as physical and spiritual suffering (Patel, Simunyu, and Gwanzura 1995). In
Uganda, the condition false teeth is not only an affliction among children, but is also
thought to be an expression of socioeconomic hardships within the collective
population. Ugandan mothers recognize the novel nature of the condition and
attribute its conception with the atrocities of the Amin regime. In this way, this
idiom is thought to be an expression of the collective trauma of war and violence as
well as subsequent poverty and socioeconomic stress (Mogensen 2000). In Guinea
Bissau, the phenomenon of kiyang-yang arose among Balanta women as a way of
expressing both individual and collective trauma associated with poverty, conflict,
and as a way of emphasizing the oppressive aspects of Balanta society that
reinforced these stressors (de Jong and Reis 2010). This term’s use as an expression
of political dissent as well as individual and collective suffering and mental distress
further illustrates the multifaceted and complex utility of idioms of distress in
communicating trauma and distress on both an individual and societal level.
   Previously explored idioms of distress from other settings have set a framework
on which culturally resonant mental healthcare has been built. As early as the 1960s,
researchers developed a psychometric instrument based on the idiom brain fag in
West Africa to measure conditions related to stress among students (Ola and
Igbokwe 2011). Research in Haiti has revealed the prevalence of head-related and
heart-related terms when describing mental suffering, which informed the
development of an emic distress screener utilizing these terms (Keys et al. 2012;
Rasmussen et al. 2015; Kaiser et al. 2013). In Nepal, researchers have identified four
distinct concepts of self and deconstructed mind–body divisions that communicate
mental distress (Kohrt and Harper 2008; Kohrt and Hruschka 2010). Subsequent
studies have used these ethnopsychologies as a basis to create culturally informed
screening tools for depression and childhood trauma (Kohrt et al. 2011). Research in
Cambodia exploring explanatory models related to khyal attacks precluded the
development of a culturally sensitive questionnaire for trauma among Cambodian
refugees (Hinton et al. 2010, 2013). Mental healthcare built upon local idioms and
communication strategies can foster accessible and nuanced pathways to care that
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                              687
support the treatment objectives of patients and clinicians, and preliminary
ethnographic research is a necessary first step.
   In Liberia, few studies have explored idioms of distress and mental health
communication. Abramowitz’ 2010 study of the term open mole provided an in-
depth look at this condition/culture-bound syndrome in the northwest of Liberia
(Abramowitz 2010). The Carter Center conducted an unpublished qualitative
assessment of general idioms of distress, which also took place in 4 counties in
northwest Liberia. They also developed a culturally adapted but unvalidated version
of the PHQ-9 for Liberia, though no emic screening tools have been developed to
incorporate local presentations and idioms of distress. This study takes an in-depth
look at distress idioms and local presentations of mental suffering with a specific
focus on symptoms that overlap with less well recognized forms of distress that
biomedical etiologies associated with common mental disorders. It is the first of its
kind to examine idioms for the purpose of developing a culturally informed
screening tool that can capture a wider range of symptomatic presentations and
serve as foundational mental health research upon which further studies can build.
Methods
Study Setting
Liberia entered a period of national recuperation and reconstruction following its
emergence from a 13-year civil war in 2003. The rebuilding process was interrupted
in 2014 by the Ebola epidemic that infected an estimated 10,687 people and directly
Fig. 1 Map of Partners In Health’s activities in Liberia. This study took place in Maryland county
                                                                                          123

688                                                   Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
led to the loss of over 8% of the healthcare workforce nationwide (Evans, Goldstein,
and Popova 2015; Centers for Disease Control 2016). Maryland county (see Fig. 1),
which contains approximately 136,000 of Liberia’s 3.5 million people, is located in
the remote and often inaccessible southeast corner of the country on the border of
Côte D’Ivoire (Government of the Republic of Liberia 2008). A large portion of the
population in this region sought refuge in Côte D’Ivoire during the civil war, which
led to the substantial disruption of the healthcare system. Following the civil war,
one epidemiological survey found 40% of adults met the criteria for Major
Depressive Disorder and 44% met the criteria for PTSD (Johnson et al. 2008).
Liberia has one psychiatric hospital and considerable stigma exists surrounding
mental healthcare, for both clinicians and patients (Esan et al. 2014; World Health
Organization 2011; Gwaikolo, Kohrt, and Cooper 2017).
Data Collection and Sampling
We employed a variety of qualitative research techniques including: (1) free-lists
accompanied by semi-structured interviews (SSIs); (n = 20); (2) pile-sort (n = 31)
exercises, and (3) focus group discussions (FGDs); (n = 3). We also reviewed a
census of 315 charts from JJ Dossen Hospital and Pleebo Health Center, the only
regional hospital and health center in the southeast that contain clinics exclusively
for mental health. All qualitative interviews and exercises were conducted by the
lead author and at least one of three trained Liberian research assistants.
   We used maximum variation sampling to obtain a representative sample of Maryland
County in terms of age, gender, ethnic community, education level, occupation, and
geographical area. Participants ranged from 19 to 81 years old and represented five
distinct ethnic communities. Participants lived in both the urban centers of Harper and
Pleebo, as well as in the surrounding rural communities. This purposive sampling
method allowed us to conduct all data collection in English. The study took place over a
6-month period from June to December 2017 in Maryland County, with support from
Partners In Health, a large NGO that supports clinical services, community health,
infrastructure development, and social support in southeast Liberia.
Step 1: Free-List Exercise and Semi-structured Interviews
We conducted free-list exercises along with SSIs among lay participants (n = 20, 8
women and 12 men) to compile an initial list of common idioms of mental distress.
Our sample size was not predetermined, but rather focused on achieving saturation
when no new information was repeatedly gleaned from interviews. During these
interviews, we did not use the word ‘‘mental illness’’, as it is poorly understood
among laypeople in the region. We instead developed descriptive situations that
included prompts such as, ‘‘what are some words you can use to describe someone
in the community who is feeling sad, is just thinking, worrying, in a way that is
different than normal?’’. All free-lists were accompanied by a semi-structured
interview, during which we asked each participant to explain and elaborate on the
terms they listed, or, in some cases, to explain their conceptualization of a term that
other participants had mentioned. Free-lists and SSIs were audio recorded and
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                 689
accompanied by written field notes and then subsequently transcribed. Resultant
qualitative data was analyzed using QSR NVivo 11 software.
   After the results of the initial term elicitation from the 20 free-list exercises and
semi-structured interviews were compiled, we conducted a focus group to better
understand the linguistic similarities and differences between terms to make an
informed decision about which terms could be combined and which represented
separate concepts. This focus group also allowed us to further differentiate between
terms which were directly related to epilepsy or psychotic symptoms, which we
excluded from the final list of terms for the pile-sort activity. We also eliminated
terms that were considered too general or not explicitly tied to mental distress, terms
that were considered stigmatizing, and terms that were only mentioned by one
person and are therefore not considered part of a shared cultural domain (Bernard
and Ryan 2010). Smith’s Salience was calculated for the final list of terms, which
takes into account the frequency and the order of mention for each term, both of
which are indicators of familiarity (Bernard and Ryan 2010). The 28 most salient
terms were included in the pile-sort activity.
Step 2: Pile-Sort Exercises
Pile-sorts were conducted among a new naı̈ve set of participants (n = 31, 15 women
and 16 men). The purpose of the exercise was to understand the relationships
between the terms that emerged from the free-list exercise. Following the process
outlined in Bernard and Ryan (2010), each term was written on a note card and
participants were asked to group the cards according to how the terms related to
each other (Bernard and Ryan 2010). Participants could create as many piles as they
thought necessary and exclude any cards that were unrelated or not understood. We
accounted for literacy by reading the cards aloud for all participants. The results
were analyzed using ANTHROPAC 4.983 to create a multidimensional scale
visualization of the groupings and interconnectedness of terms, with the resulting
cluster analysis overlaid in color on the graphic (Borgatti 1996).
Step 3: Chart Reviews
We reviewed a census of 315 patient charts written at initial visits from May 2015 to
September 2017 in the mental health clinic of the county hospital in Harper city in
order to examine the commonly expressed somatic symptoms that accompany mental
distress in a clinical setting. We captured qualitative data that identified the physical
complaints of patients during the clinical encounter and any idioms patients used to
describe their presenting features. Recognizing that current diagnostic criteria are
based solely on a biomedical model of mental illness, we reviewed all charts and
extracted qualitative data from those that potentially reflected local presentations of
mental distress across diagnostic categories. We abstracted data from the ‘‘presenting
complaints’’ and the ‘‘patient history’’ section of the charts, both of which were
handwritten lists or narratives of the patient’s primary complaints and rarely
contained interpretation from the clinician. For this reason, these sections were
thought to accurately reflect words exchanged during the clinical encounter and
                                                                               123

690                                                             Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
therefore provide a representation of the patient’s complaints and reasons for visiting
the clinic. We reviewed a census of 315 charts and extracted qualitative data from 189
that contained a substantive patient history and/or presenting complaints section. Re-
sults were coded for symptomatology and idioms using QSR NVivo 11 software.
Step 4: Screening Tool Development
The final screening tool contained two domains, one with locally-derived idioms of
distress each paired with a function impairment question, and the other with common
physical manifestations of mental suffering. We sought confirmation and further
explanation of the results of the free-list and pile-sort exercises in two focus groups, one
with 9 lay community members (3 women and 6 men) and one with 4 mental health
clinicians (2 women and 2 men). For terms represented in the graphic visualization of
the cluster analysis (Fig. 2), we engaged in a discussion designed to clarify which terms
in each distinct cluster were the most appropriate for a screening tool. For each cluster
Fig. 2 Multidimensional scale representation of 28 idioms of distress from pile-sort activities, colors
overlaid represent distinct groupings resulting from cluster analysis
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                 691
of terms, we identified the terms that were the most well understood and represented
distinct ideas or phenomena. For situations in which multiple terms referred to the same
phenomenon, we discussed which term best encapsulated the phenomenon with the
most clarity. For the physical presentations, we included the symptoms that were most
commonly mentioned in the patient charts and did not directly overlap with symptoms
mentioned in the idioms portion of the screener in order to reduce redundancy. The
focus groups were a confirmatory mechanism to ensure the relevance of our term
choices and the clarity of our language usage.
Analyses
Our qualitative analysis followed the methods for Cultural Domain Analysis (CDA)
described in Bernard and Ryan (2010). The authors describe this as a technique used
for generating and understanding a set of concepts that refer to the same conceptual
sphere (Bernard and Ryan 2010). For the initial term elicitation, we calculated
Smith’s Salience, a statistic that takes into account both the frequency and how early
each term was mentioned (Bernard and Ryan 2010). For pile-sort exercises, we used
multidimensional scaling (MDS) in order to understand the structure of terms within
the domain of mental distress. This generated a visualization of the relationships
between terms. A subsequent hierarchical cluster analysis confirmed the accuracy of
groupings among the terms. We calculated the eigenratio of the domain to
determine consensus among participants. All numeric calculations and visualiza-
tions were conducted using ANTHROPAC 4.983 software (Borgatti 1996).
Results
Our results yielded idioms that referred to a multitude of ways of experiencing mental
distress and personalized the narratives behind these expressions. During a particularly
poignant interview, one mental health clinician recounted the story of a patient who was
suffering from mental distress but struggled to find the words to express what he was
experiencing. The patient complained of severe recurrent headaches, the inability to
focus, and a deep sadness that he described with a particular term that the clinician was
having trouble remembering, but that had brought her to tears. After some time, a look
of grief and recognition passed on her face; she picked up a pen, wrote something on her
hand, and held it out. ‘‘My heart die in me’’.
   This evocative example highlights the importance of idioms in expressing mental
distress and exemplifies how one idiom can encapsulate a myriad of ‘‘classical’’
symptoms of mental ill-health. Through the processes of analyzing the qualitative
date from the SSIs, FGDs, free-list, and pile-sort activities, we found that the
majority of idioms fell into two distinct categories, one of terms related to the mind
and brain, and other of terms related to the heart. Two smaller collections of terms
were those related to losing consciousness and those relating to conditions
associated with both mind/brain and heart terms. One last term was frequently
excluded by participants and therefore fell outside of the other terms, indicating it
was poorly understood. The clustering of these categories can be found in Fig. 2.
                                                                               123

692                                                      Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
Step 1: Free List Exercises and Semi-structured Interviews
Interviews with 20 participants (8 women and 12 men) resulted in an initial list of
64 idioms of mental distress. Smith’s Salience was calculated for each term, the
values of which ranged from 0.003 to 0.689 (see Supplementary Appendix I). Our
initial term elicitation interviews yielded terms referring to a range of conditions
including terms associated with psychotic symptoms and seizures. During the SSIs,
we asked participants to elaborate on each term they listed. A subsequent FGD,
combined with the data from the SSIs, led us to eliminate 36 terms that were poorly
understood or stigmatizing, terms referring explicitly to seizures or psychosis, terms
that were not part of a shared cultural domain, and multiple terms referring to the
same concept (see Supplementary Appendix I for excluded idioms). Twenty-five
terms were only mentioned once and were therefore eliminated for not being part of
a shared cultural domain.
   Of the initial list of idioms, we discuss three highly salient and evocative
examples used to communicate mental distress in rural Liberia: frustration, thinking
too much, and pressure.
   The term frustration emerged as the most salient term, with a Smith’s Salience
value of 0.689. This term, which was endorsed by 19 out of 20 free-list and SSI
participants, has a range of meanings that encompass a wide variety of symptoms
and idioms. As one person stated, when a person is frustrated, ‘‘they feel that all is
lost, life is not in their favor, so they can just let go, let loose’’ (business owner, 35,
male). Others described it as ‘‘hard thinking, plenty thinking, thinking too much’’
(Township Clerk, 55, male), having ‘‘plenty trouble in the heart’’ (farmer, 75, male),
‘‘you feel you are defeated, that you’re giving up’’ (university professor, 76, male).
The term was associated with behavior change that goes beyond everyday feelings
of sadness. As one businesswoman (age 41) described:
   Someone who is frustrated is different. There are some people, they are not
   frustrated but they are just quiet, they are sad. And they have some people who
   are frustrated and because of this they decide to carry themselves away from
   people, to just be away, I’m in my problem let me just be alone, I don’t need
   someone to be around me.
   Thinking too much was also widely used to express mental distress, and was the
second most salient idiom, with a Smith’s Salience of 0.444. Thinking too much was
described in a variety of circumstances, usually associated with preoccupied and
ruminating thoughts. A traditional healer (male, 42) described the difference
between thinking too much and worrying about small things:
   I worry about the clothes that the man wears, I hope I will get that thing, that
   person’s worrying about that thing. But thinking, with your whole knowledge,
   your whole heart, your whole mind, everything’s on that thing. It means you
   just focus on that whole thing.
   Thinking too much was thought of as pathological and was frequently associated
with other symptoms. One woman told us that ‘‘sometimes you walk in the street
because the thinking too much for you, you talk by yourself’’ (single mother, 36),
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                              693
referring to two symptoms (walk in the streets and talk by yourself) endorsed as
relating to psychosis. Another respondent echoed this explanatory model, saying
that someone who is thinking too much can ‘‘suffer from some sort of stigma, stress
from too much thinking, like family problem or other thing, they get them to
mentally disordered’’ (policewoman, 30).
   Many respondents commented on the development of pressure (Smith’s Salience
0.389), which has various clinical interpretations. Many respondents mentioned
pressure as synonymous with hypertension, or high blood pressure. As one retired
government official (male, 81) explained:
   Pressure can start from the food we eat. For instance, I had pressure, they told
   me not to eat…before I went to hospital in Monrovia, when they check me
   they say what type of food you eating? I told them; they say from now on
   don’t eat butter rice again.
   Other respondents told us that pressure results from mental distress. Specifically,
‘‘when you think too much, it runs down into your brain and you develop pressure;
you have mental tension’’ (female business owner, 41). Or alternatively, ‘‘To be
overjoyed, to be anger, too much talking, stress, worry over one problem can make
you go high, cause pressure’’ (businesswoman, 34). Respondents described pressure
as a physical sensation, usually a head or neck pain. One local governor (female, 47)
explained ‘‘most time from your neck, your head start to hurt unnecessary, but it
treat people different–different ways, sometimes your eyes start to turn [dizziness
occurs]’’. In most instances, pressure emerged as a salient term to communicate
mental distress, regardless of the degree of biomedical association. One woman told
us she had high blood pressure and said, ‘‘sometimes you worry too much, then the
pressure can be too much for you too, and they do your BP, but that not high blood
pressure’’ (housewife, 51).
   These idioms reflect a few examples of culturally salient idioms and explanatory
models for mental ill-health in Liberia, though the dynamic and multifaceted nature
of culture itself means that interpretations inevitably vary. The full list of idioms
from the pile-sorts, their salience, and their general meanings are in supplementary
appendix III.
Step 2: Pile-Sort Exercises
Four distinct groupings of terms emerged from the pile-sort activity, with each
category seemingly representing different aspects of mental distress and their
associated symptoms (see Fig. 2). The eigenratio resulting from the consensus
analysis was 7.087, indicating agreement among participants. The two most
substantial categories include terms related to the heart and terms related to the
brain and mind. Out of the 28 terms included in the pile-sort activity, 75% fell into
one of these two categories. Heart-related terms, which accounted for 10 of 28,
primarily described various emotions or emotional states. Specifically, several terms
related to feeling upset, angry, or short tempered (heart not good, heart heavy, heart
spoiled). One barber (32, male) described:
                                                                            123

694                                                   Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
    Sometimes maybe somebody make you vexed already, and while you thinking
    about that and somebody wants to bring jokes to you, you say ‘no, my man,
    my heart not good, my heart spoiled, so I don’t want you bother me’.
    One term that fell into the heart-related category, too much fear in you, describes
feeling anxious or easily frightened, and was closely linked to the term heart cut,
meaning startled, or the sensation of the heart skipping a beat or palpitating. A
mental health clinician (female, 44) described people who experience this, saying
‘‘they just fear that something big is going to happen to them, and they are jittering,
on edge, like if you touch something their heart will cut and they want to jump’’.
Another term in this category, heart fall down, describes disappointment, or lack of
trust, as when ‘‘maybe I do something to you that does not please you, it can make
your heart to fall down from me’’ (farmer, 59). Several other terms described
feelings of being overburdened or overwhelmed, such as too much on the heart,
problems on the heart, and trouble on the heart. One Township Clerk (male, 55)
described a situation that leads to too much on the heart:
    The money that I was depending on, I know next month my house I will pay it.
    Then someone steals my money. Too much on the heart. Keeping somebody’s
    money, if I don’t have strong heart, sometimes it’s cause frustration.
    Heart terms were connected to both emotional pathology and resilience.
Respondents referred to this resilience as having a ‘‘strong heart’’, or occasionally,
a ‘‘man heart’’ (though it was stated that many women have a ‘‘man heart’’). One
respondent explained, ‘‘if I don’t have strong heart, sometimes it can lead to
frustration’’. Or alternatively, ‘‘your heart cut, you can feel something happening,
you can get sickness if you not get strong heart’’ (fisherman, 26).
    The terms heart cut and too much fear in you, while still in the heart-related
category according to the cluster analysis, were situated closest to a third cluster of
terms that was comprised of the terms fall off, go off, pressure, and eye turning,
suggesting a relationship. This group seemingly describes terms related to losing
consciousness or fainting. Eye turning, which means dizziness, and pressure, which
was described above, relate to fall off and go off, both of which refer to losing
consciousness. Respondents described a number of situations in which falling off
and going off can occur, ranging from epileptic fits to sudden and surprising news to
stressful events. One farmer (male, 59) described such a situation:
    I saw it once; a lady, she had a man who had another friend, so the worriness,
    you know she was thinking too much, could not eat, don’t want to eat, feel like
    she was losing her man so, one day she had to fall off.
    One mental health clinician suggested these terms can refer to panic attacks,
though differentiating between this and other interpretations including losing
consciousness and epileptic episodes remains a challenge.
    The largest cluster, comprising 11 of the 28 pile-sort terms (39%), included terms
related to the mind or brain. Contrasting to the heart-related terms that primarily
described emotions and emotional states, this cluster includes terms related to
thinking, focus, and attention. The terms mind is far off, attention is not there, brain
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                695
can’t sit down, and can’t focus your mind refer to a lack of concentration or inability
to focus. Some respondents explained this as an extreme symptom associated with
psychosis, as in ‘‘if he thinking too much, it makes the mind be crazy. You don’t
know what you’re doing, your mind far away from you’’ (cleaner, male, 64).
Thinking too much, problems on the mind, brain hot, and playing on the mind
generally refer to rumination, whereas not to yourself and do things out of the way
refer to abnormal behavior or confusion. The term frustration, which has been
described above in detail, also falls in this category, though many respondents
explained frustration as an outcome resulting from various other idioms in the
brain/mind and heart categories. The mind and brain related terms were frequently
referenced as part of a causal pathway leading to more severe mental illness, with
respondents citing these idioms as leading to craziness, particularly if they are not
treated.
   The terms traumatized and tension comprise a fourth grouping of idioms located
between the mind/brain terms and the heart terms. Similar to the term frustration,
the term traumatized was cited as referring to a condition that could result from a
number of factors, including both heart and mind/brain idioms. Tension was
described as stress or as a product of stress. As one respondent described, ‘‘if you
thinking too much, it runs down into your brain and you develop pressure, you have
tension, mental tension’’ (businesswoman, 41).
   The location of several terms on the chart indicates the interrelatedness between
clusters. Tension, traumatized, and worrying too much lie in between the brain/mind
and the heart clusters, indicating that they are associated with both groups.
Similarly, heart cut and too much fear in you lie between the heart-related terms and
the terms related to fainting and unconsciousness. The last term, go deep into a
problem, stood out on its own. Participants frequently excluded this term from the
activity and indicated that it was not well understood.
   Participants described multiple causal models that explain the interrelatedness
between groupings of idioms. Some participants described how symptoms described
in the mind/brain grouping or the heart grouping could lead to outcomes in the
grouping of terms associated with losing consciousness. One person explained that
‘‘some children don’t listen, it can cause pressure and could make you to fall off. If
you thinking too much, it can make you to fall off’’ (businesswoman, 41). A
common narrative that emerged placed distress idioms on a causal path leading to
more severe mental illness if left untreated. One person, when talking about mental
distress in general, said ‘‘I look at it like the person will become mentally ill.
Because it’s like placing a wound, a scar on that person’s mind. Which needs cure.
It needs cure and if not well taken care of it will intensify’’ (police officer, female,
30). Participants frequently cited a person’s inherent capacity to handle certain
stimuli, usually referring specifically to the heart and brain/mind. Once this capacity
was breached, illness occurred. A traditional healer (male, 43) explained this
process:
   Human beings have a level that you’re supposed to think about. Your thinking
   supposed to stop. Sometimes when you’re above that level, sometimes your
                                                                              123

696                                                        Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
    mind, you [do] things that you’re not supposed to do. You are doing things
    that just [go] to craziness.
Step 3: Chart Reviews
The review of 315 charts resulted in 189 charts with narratives in the patient history
and presenting complaints sections. Further analyses revealed 65 mentions of 8
distinct physical symptoms associated with mental distress within these 189 charts
(34.4% of charts with physical symptoms noted). Trouble sleeping was the most
frequently mentioned symptom with 17 mentions, or 26% of all physical complaints
including this symptom (see Table 1). Sleep trouble included trouble falling asleep,
staying asleep, not sleeping enough, or sleeping too much. Headache was the second
most common symptom, mentioned 15 times, followed by fast heartbeat (n = 8),
problems eating, including lack of appetite or overeating (n = 7), unexplained body
pain (n = 7), odd bodily sensations, including ‘‘feeling something walking on the
body’’ or ‘‘feeling something walking on the head’’ (n = 5), feelings of weakness,
tiredness, or lethargy (n = 4), and numbness (n = 2).
Step 4: Screening Tool Development
Among the terms heart spoiled, heart heavy, and heart not good, for instance,
participants chose the term heart not good as it is the most well understood of these
three terms that refer to the same phenomenon. We included 11 terms in the final
screener that were deemed to represent separate concepts relevant to mental distress.
From the pile-sort analyses and resulting multidimensional scale visualization, we
included 5 idioms each from the mind/brain cluster and the heart cluster, as well as
the term pressure from the cluster related to losing consciousness. The final
screening tool was divided into two parts and included 11 idioms of distress and 6
physical symptoms with each item accompanied by a question pertaining to
functional impairment, and can be found in the Supplementary Materials in
Appendix II. The approximate meanings of each term from the pile-sort activity can
be found in Online Appendix III.
Table 1 Physical symptoms extracted from patient charts
Symptom                                                 n                                  %
Sleep trouble                                           17                                 26.2
Headache                                                15                                 23.1
Fast heartbeat                                           8                                 12.3
Problems eating                                          7                                 10.8
Unexplained pain                                         7                                 10.8
Odd bodily sensations                                    5                                  0.08
Weak/tired/lethargy                                      4                                  0.06
Numbness                                                 2                                  0.03
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                  697
Discussion
This study examined local idioms of mental suffering to inform the development of
an emic screening tool for mental distress. Through qualitative interviews, focus-
group discussions, pile sorts, and chart reviews, we arrived at a list of 28 unique and
non-stigmatizing idioms of mental distress, along with 8 commonly expressed
physical symptoms. We included 11 idioms and 6 physical symptoms in a final draft
Liberian Distress Screener (LDS) to be pilot tested in public-sector primary care
settings.
    The majority of idioms (75%) fell into two distinct groupings relating to the heart
and to the brain/mind, which suggests the centrality of these types of terms to
articulate mental distress in rural Liberia. Other studies in various settings have
uncovered idioms of mental suffering related to the heart and to the head/
brain/mind. Among Darfurian refugees, mental distress idioms fell into two distinct
categories, one of which was huzon, or ‘‘deep sadness’’, which was also called ‘‘pain
in the heart’’ (Rasmussen et al. 2011). In Haiti, idioms predominantly referred to tét,
meaning head, or ké, meaning heart, in Haitian Kreyol (Keys et al. 2012). A study of
South Asian women in Britain similarly found the heart and heart-related terms as
central to communicating emotional distress. In Nigeria, the term brain fag denotes
an amalgamation of symptoms related to mental exhaustion (Prince 1985). In our
study, mental health clinicians reinforced the importance of the heart to mental
distress, saying that, in the clinic, patients are more likely to cite problems with their
heart than their brain or mind, either because the heart is not associated with mental
illness and is therefore less stigmatizing, or because the heart is easier to
conceptualize than the brain or the mind, especially in the most remote parts of
Liberia. In Nepal, Kohrt and Harper (2008) also found distinct heart-mind and
brain-mind associated idioms, and identified brain-mind problems as particularly
stigmatizing (Kohrt and Harper 2008). Similar patterns of heart/mind interactions
are apparent elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa. In Nigeria, explanatory models
regarding the condition ode ori include strings connecting the brain to other parts of
the body, including the heart. The symptoms of this condition include palpitations
and other cardiac symptoms, illustrating the linkage between the heart and brain
(Makanjuola 1987). Further research can reveal specific etiologic patterns within
ethnopsychologies related to heart and mind/brain idioms to determine their least
stigmatizing utilization in a clinical setting.
    The remaining idioms fell into three smaller groupings: one comprised of terms
related to fainting or losing consciousness, another of terms that represented
conditions or emotional states resulting from various other idioms, including heart
and mind/brain idioms, and one separate term that was not well understood. The
applicability of these terms in the identification and treatment of mental distress in a
clinical context is perhaps less immediately useful, as these terms were mostly
deemed ambiguous or stigmatizing, though an exploration of alternative explana-
tory models could reveal their value in the overall Liberian ethnopsychology.
    The most salient idiom in our context was frustration, which falls in the mind/
brain cluster of idioms but represents an emotional state resulting from various other
                                                                                123

698                                                   Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
idioms in both the heart and the mind/brain categories. This idiom, while seemingly
similar to the word ‘‘frustration’’ in other contexts, refers not to a passing sensation
but to a state of being that is characterized by various other symptoms of distress.
The chronicity of this condition is notable because idioms with a longer temporal
aspect are thought, according to previous research, to be predictive of other
expressions and manifestations of mental distress (Hinton and Lewis-Fernández
2010). This is also evident in explanations about how having a ‘‘man heart’’ was
linked to physical resilience to other idioms of distress, whereas having a ‘‘weak
heart’’ predisposes one to frustration. This usage of frustration may be unique to the
Liberian setting, and suggests an alternative explanatory model for mental distress
that is reminiscent of similar findings in Sub-Saharan Africa.
    Several explanatory models emerged linking idioms of mental distress to other
pathologies that are not necessarily linked to mental distress in biomedical
nosology. Respondents associated idioms of mental distress, especially those in the
mind/brain category, as a precursor to psychoses and more severe mental illness if
left untreated. This mirrors findings in mainland China, in which excessive thinking
was perceived as a salient cause of schizophrenia; among the Khwe in South Africa,
in which thinking a lot could lead to madness; in the Peruvian Andes, where the
Quechua term pinsamientuwan, or worrying thoughts, can evolve into lukuyasca, or
craziness; and in Haiti, where thinking too much was endorsed as leading to fou, or
madness (Yang et al. 2010; den Hertog et al. 2016; Pedersen, Kienzler, and Gamarra
2010; Kaiser et al. 2014). In this alternative explanatory model from the DSM and
ICD, thinking too much is seen as a network of processes in which excessive
negative rumination interacts with other psychopathological symptoms which can
become progressively worse (Hinton et al. 2016). This aligns with non-Western
alternative explanatory models that have been explored as alternatives to Western
psychopathologies that see symptoms as indicative of underlying and measurable
disease categories like PTSD, depression and anxiety. Network analysis sees
symptoms or experiences of mental distress as clustered and interrelated, but not
indicative of a latent condition (Borsboom and Cramer 2013). This interpretation
creates the space for treatment of the symptom or network of symptoms as well as
shifting the focus to holistic and community based-treatments that may not be
grounded in Western biomedical treatment modalities.
    Heart idioms were also referred to as precursors for illness, though these idioms
were more commonly associated with physical illness. Respondents linked heart cut
and other heart idioms to sickness and pressure, which shares many symptoms with
hypertension and can lead to death. Similar connections exist in other settings,
including among Punjabis living in Britain, where a sinking heart can lead to heart
attacks, and among women in northern India, where tension is associated with high
blood pressure and diabetes (Krause 1989; Weaver 2017). Physical somatizations of
mental distress in other settings have been documented to play an important role in
the expression of mental distress, and so the idiom pressure is important to note for
its utility as an expression of both mental distress and physical symptoms (Kirmayer
2001). This idiom could also be a representation of the evolution of distress idioms
over time, whereas what was formerly an expression of mental distress has been
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                   699
increasingly associated with high blood pressure since the introduction of
biomedical models of illness.
   The second most salient idiom, thinking too much, aligned with findings in
various settings worldwide. A recent systematic review identified 138 instances of
this idiom in published literature related to communicating mental distress, though
importantly, the interpretation varied widely and was not intended to be indicative
of a universal condition devoid of nuance across cultures (Kaiser et al. 2015a).
Similar to Kaiser et al.’s findings, thinking too much in the Liberian context was not
considered stigmatizing, unlike many of the other mind/brain-related terms. While
this idiom fell into the mind/brain category in our analysis, it is still indicative of the
close association of mind/brain terms to heart related terms, which is evidenced by
the respondent who referred to thinking too much in the heart. Similarly, kufungisisa
in Zambia and South Africa, which translates to ‘‘thinking too much’’, was said to
cause pain and physical pressure on the heart (Patel, Simunyu, and Gwanzura 1995).
This idiom, for this reason, may not follow a specific DSM or ICD psychiatric
construct, but nonetheless remains important in the articulation of mental distress.
   The screening tool itself resembles screeners from other settings, including the
Afghan Symptom Checklist and the Kreyol Distress Idioms in that it is comprised
entirely of emic terms (Kaiser et al. 2013; Miller et al. 2006). Other tools, including
the Shona Symptom Questionnaire and subsequent works, combine emic concepts
and etic translations and have also been shown to have high reliability and internal
consistency (Patel et al. 1997). One unique aspect of our screener is our inclusion of
physical symptoms as a category separate from idioms of distress, though there was
one term (heart cut) that was identified as a salient idiom and used to describe a
physical symptom. The somatization of mental distress is common in many settings,
especially where expressing overt mental distress may be less culturally acceptable,
and was shown in our chart reviews to play an important role in the expression of
mental distress in a clinical setting (Tylee and Gandhi 2005; Kirmayer 2001). Next
steps are to refine and validate a formal screening tool by performing a quantitative
analysis to test for the applicability and consistency of terms within the Liberian
population. It’s important to note, however, that the screener developed in this study
is a preliminary version meant to catalogue and document salient distress idioms in
rural Liberia. It provides the basis for the creation of a framework that builds mental
healthcare from an informed and culturally resonant perspective.
Limitations
The generalizability of our research was somewhat limited by geographical
constraints. Lack of funding limited the geographic scope of the project to Maryland
County, and thus the idioms of distress uncovered in this context may not be
universal across Liberia. The interplay of culture and language changes over time,
so a true understanding of communication of mental distress requires a continually
updated recognition of linguistic nuances. Furthermore, non-English speakers were
excluded, contributing to a lack of exploration of idioms within local dialects. Last,
the nature of our study still approached our research question from a somewhat
biomedical standpoint. Our aim was to work with the Liberian Ministry of Health
                                                                                123

700                                                              Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
and Partners In Health to improve screening and treatment for common mental
disorders as they are engaged in building community-based mental healthcare.
Other research goes a step further and first identifies what community members
perceive as the most salient problems that cause mental distress in their setting
before cataloguing the articulation of distress. Our model started from the inherent
assumption that the distress about which we were asking is indeed seen as a problem
in this setting, and we strove to balance emic mental health research with the
existing goals for service provision, which include the integration of valid and
effective screening mechanisms into primary care.
Conclusion
Understanding idioms of distress and communication surrounding mental suffering
is essential for building culturally resonant mental healthcare. Liberian idioms of
distress present several commonalities with mental health research in other settings,
suggesting the universality of aspects of the experience of mental suffering.
Important key differences, however, such as the salience of frustration in mental
health discourse and the interpretation of mind/brain and heart idioms and
interactions, reinforce the need for exploration of the variations of mental health
communication cross-culturally. Research and interventions that prioritize building
mental health programming from the grassroots by giving voice to local explanatory
models, communication strategies, and pathways to care can better serve the
communities in which they function.
Funding The study was supported by Partners in Health, Liberia. BHW was supported by Grant Number
K01MH110599 from the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health. The content is solely the responsibility
of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of interest The authors report no conflict of interest.
References
Abramowitz, Sharon Alane
  2010 Trauma and Humanitarian Translation in Liberia: The Tale of Open Mole. Culture, Medicine,
         and Psychiatry 34(2):353–379. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-010-9172-0.
Bernard, H. Russell, and Gery W. Ryan
  2010 Analyzing Qualitative Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc.
Borgatti, Steve
  1996 Anthropac 4.983 Natick, MA: Analytic Technologies.
Borsboom, Denny, and Angélique O.J. Cramer
  2013 Network Analysis: An Integrative Approach to the Structure of Psychopathology. Annual Review
         of Clinical Psychology 9:91–121. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-050212-185608.
Centers for Disease Control
  2016 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa—Case Counts. https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/outbreaks/
        2014-west-africa/case-counts.html.
 123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                              701
de Jong, Joop T., and Ria Reis
  2010 Kiyang-Yang, a West-Africa Postwar Idiom of Distress. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry
         34(2):301–321. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-010-9178-7.
den Hertog, T.N., M. de Jong, A.J. van der Ham, D. Hinton, and R. Reis
  2016 ‘‘Thinking a Lot’’ Among the Khwe of South Africa: A Key Idiom of Personal and Interpersonal
         Distress. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 40(3):383–403. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-015-
         9475-2.
Esan, Oluyomi, Jibril Abdumalik, Julian Eaton, Lola Kola, Woye Fadahunsi, and Oye Gureje
  2014 Global Mental Health Reforms: Mental Health Care in Anglophone West Africa. Psychiatric
         Services 65(9):1084–1087. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201300300.
Evans, David K., Markus Goldstein, and Anna Popova
  2015 Health-Care Worker Mortality and the Legacy of the Ebola Epidemic. The Lancet Global Health.
         https://doi.org/10.1016/s2214-109x(15)00065-0.
Government of the Republic of Liberia
  2008 2008 National Population and Housing Census Preliminary Results. Monrovia. http://www.
        emansion.gov.lr/doc/census_2008provisionalresults.pdf.
Gwaikolo, Wilfred S., Brandon A. Kohrt, and Janice L. Cooper
  2017 Health System Preparedness for Integration of Mental Health Services in Rural Liberia. BMC
         Health Services Research 17(2):508. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-017-2447-1.
Haroz, E.E., M. Ritchey, J.K. Bass, B.A. Kohrt, J. Augustinavicius, L. Michalopoulos, M.D. Burkey, and
P. Bolton
  2017 How is Depression Experienced Around the World? A Systematic Review of Qualitative
         Literature. Social Science and Medicine 183:151–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/
         j.socscimed.2016.12.030.
Hinton, D.E., and R. Lewis-Fernández
  2010 Idioms of Distress among Trauma Survivors: Subtypes and Clinical Utility. Culture, Medicine,
         and Psychiatry 34(2):209–218.
Hinton, Devon E., Vuth Pich, Luana Marques, Angela Nickerson, and Mark H. Pollack
  2010 Khyâl Attacks: A Key Idiom of Distress Among Traumatized Cambodia Refugees. Culture,
         Medicine, and Psychiatry 34(2):244–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-010-9174-y.
Hinton, Devon E., M. Alexandra Kredlow, Eric Bui, and Stefan G. Hofmann
  2013 The Relationship of PTSD to Key Somatic Complaints and Cultural Syndromes among
         Cambodian Refugees Attending a Psychiatric Clinic: The Cambodian Somatic Symptom and
         Syndrome Inventory (CSSI). Transcultural Psychiatry 50(3):347–370. https://doi.org/10.1177/
         1363461513481187.
Hinton, D.E., D.H. Barlow, R. Reis, and J. de Jong
  2016 A Transcultural Model of the Centrality of ‘‘Thinking a Lot’’ in Psychopathologies Across the
         Globe and the Process of Localization: A Cambodian Refugee Example. Culture, Medicine, and
         Psychiatry 40(4):570–619.
Johnson, Kirsten, Jana Asher, Stephanie Rosborough, Amisha Raja, Rajesh Panjabi, Charles Beadling,
and Lynn Lawry
  2008 Association of Combatant Status and Sexual Violence With Health and Mental Health Outcomes
         in Postconflict Liberia. JAMA 300(6):676. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.300.6.676.
Kaiser, Bonnie N., Brandon A. Kohrt, Hunter M. Keys, Nayla M. Khoury, and Aimée-Rika T. Brewster
  2013 Strategies for Assessing Mental Health in Haiti: Local Instrument Development and Transcul-
         tural Translation. Transcultural Psychiatry 50(4):532–558. https://doi.org/10.1177/
         1363461513502697.
Kaiser, Bonnie N., Kristen E. McLean, Brandon A. Kohrt, Ashley K. Hagaman, Bradley H. Wagenaar,
Nayla M. Khoury, and Hunter M. Keys
  2014 Reflechi twòp—Thinking Too Much: Description of a Cultural Syndrome in Haiti’s Central
         Plateau. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 38(3):448–472. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-014-
         9380-0.
Kaiser, Bonnie N., Emily E. Haroz, Brandon A. Kohrt, Paul A. Bolton, Judith K. Bass, and Devon E.
  Hinton
  2015a ‘‘Thinking Too Much’’: A Systematic Review of a Common Idiom of Distress.’’ Social Science
         and Medicine (1982) 147:170–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.10.044.
Kaiser, Bonnie N., Brandon A. Kohrt, Bradley H. Wagenaar, Michael R. Kramer, Kristen E. McLean,
  Ashley K. Hagaman, Nayla M. Khoury, and Hunter M. Keys
                                                                                           123

702                                                               Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703
 2015b ‘‘Scale Properties of the Kreyòl Distress Idioms (KDI) Screener: Association of an
           Ethnographically-Developed Instrument with Depression, Anxiety, and Sociocultural Risk
           Factors in Rural Haiti.’’ International Journal of Culture and Mental Health 8(4):341–58.
           https://doi.org/10.1080/17542863.2015.1015580.
Keys, Hunter M., Bonnie N. Kaiser, Brandon A. Kohrt, Nayla M. Khoury, and Aimée Rika T. Brewster
 2012 Idioms of Distress, Ethnopsychology, and the Clinical Encounter in Haiti’s Central Plateau.
         Social Science and Medicine 75(3):555–564. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.03.040.
Khoury, Nayla M., Bonnie N. Kaiser, Hunter M. Keys, Aimee Rika T. Brewster, and Brandon A. Kohrt
 2012 Explanatory Models and Mental Health Treatment: Is Vodou an Obstacle to Psychiatric
         Treatment in Rural Haiti?. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 36(3):514–534. https://doi.org/
         10.1007/s11013-012-9270-2.
Kirmayer, L.J.
 2001 Cultural Variations in the Clinical Presentation of Depression and Anxiety: Implications for
         Diagnosis and Treatment. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 62(Suppl 13):22–30.
Kleinman, Arthur
 1987 Anthropology and Psychiatry: The Role of Culture in Cross-Cultural Research on Illness. British
         Journal of Psychiatry 151:447–454.
Kohrt, Brandon A., and Ian Harper
 2008 Navigating Diagnoses: Understanding Mind-Body Relations, Mental Health, and Stigma in
         Nepal. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 32(4):462–491. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-008-
         9110-6.
Kohrt, Brandon A., and Daniel J. Hruschka
 2010 Nepali Concepts of Psychological Trauma: The Role of Idioms of Distress, Ethnopsychology and
         Ethnophysiology in Alleviating Suffering and Preventing Stigma. Culture, Medicine and
         Psychiatry 34(2):322–352. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-010-9170-2.
Kohrt, Brandon A., Mark J.D. Jordans, Wietse A. Tol, Nagendra P. Luitel, Sujen M. Maharjan, and
Nawaraj Upadhaya
 2011 Validation of Cross-Cultural Child Mental Health and Psychosocial Research Instruments:
         Adapting the Depression Self-Rating Scale and Child PTSD Symptom Scale in Nepal. BMC
         Psychiatry 11(1):127. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-244x-11-127.
Krause, Inga-Britt
 1989 Sinking Heart: A Punjab Communication Of Distress. Social Science and Medicine 29(4):
        563–575.            https://ac-els-cdn-com.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/0277953689902025/1-s2.0-
        0277953689902025-main.pdf?_tid=b6df5792-bf2c-11e7-900a-00000aab0f01&acdnat=
        1509558622_0778077cb8d6bec2e6f22c77e51190ee.
Makanjuola, R.A.O.
 1987 ‘Ode Ori’: A Culture-Bound Disorder with Prominent Somatic Features in Yoruba Nigerian
         Patients. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 75:231–236.
Miller, Kenneth E., P. Omidian, A.S. Quraishy, N. Quraishy, M.N. Nasiry, S. Nasiry, N.M. Karyar, and
A.A. Yaqubi
 2006 The Afghan Symptom Checklist: A Culturally Grounded Approach to Mental Health Assessment
         in a Conflict Zone. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 76(4):423–433. https://doi.org/10.1037/
         0002-9432.76.4.423.
Mogensen, H.O.
 2000 False Teeth and Real Suffering: The Social Course of ‘Germectomy’ in Eastern Uganda. Culture,
         Medicine, and Psychiatry 24:331–351.
Ola, B.A., and D.O. Igbokwe
 2011 Factoral Validation and Reliability Analysis of the Brain Fag Syndrome Scale. African Health
         Science 11(3):334–340.
Patel, V., E. Simunyu, and F. Gwanzura
 1995 Kufungisisa (Thinking Too Much): A Shona Idiom for Non-Psychotic Mental Illness. Central
         African Journal of Medicine 41(7):209–215.
Patel, V., E. Simunyu, F. Gwanzura, G. Lewis, and A. Mann
 1997 The Shona Symptom Questionnaire: The Development of an Indigenous Measure of Common
         Mental Disorders in Harare. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 95:469–475. https://doi.org/
         10.1111/j.1600-0447.1997.tb10134.x.
123

Cult Med Psychiatry (2018) 42:684–703                                                               703
Pedersen, Duncan, Hanna Kienzler, and Jeffrey Gamarra
  2010 Llaki and Ñakary: Idioms of Distress and Suffering Among the Highland Quechua in the
         Peruvian Andes. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry 34(2):279–300. https://doi.org/10.1007/
         s11013-010-9173-z.
Prince, Raymond
  1985 The Concept of Culture-Bound Syndromes: Anorexia Nervosa and Brain-Fag. Social Science
         and Medicine 21(2):197–203.
Quarshie, Anu
  2006 Emotions, Somatization and Psychaitric Symptoms Among the Akan. Studia Orientalia 103:131–
         145.
Rasmussen, Andrew, Eddy Eustache, Giuseppe Raviola, Bonnie Kaiser, David J. Grelotti, and Gary S.
Belkin
  2015 Development and Validation of a Haitian Creole Screening Instrument for Depression.
         Transcultural Psychiatry 52(1):33–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461514543546.
Rasmussen, Andrew, Basila Katoni, Allen S. Keller, and John Wilkinson
  2011 Posttraumatic Idioms of Distress Among Darfur Refugees: Hozun and Majnun. Transcultural
         Psychiatry 48(4):392–415. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461511409283.
Summerfield, Derek
  2008 How Scientifically Valid Is the Knowledge Base of Global Mental Health?. BMJ (Clinical
         Research Ed.) 336(7651):992–994. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.39513.441030.ad.
Summerfield, Derek
  2012 ‘‘Afterword: Against global Mental Health’’ The Western Mental Health Field in Western
        Countries. Transcultural Psychiatry 49:3–4. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461512454701.
Sweetland, Annika C., Gary S. Belkin, and Helena Verdeli
  2014 Measuring Depression and Anxiety in Sub-Saharan Africa. Depression and Anxiety 31(3):223–
         232. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22142.
Tylee, André, and Paul Gandhi
  2005 The Importance of Somatic Symptoms in Depression in Primary Care. Primary Care Companion
         to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 7(4):167–176.
Weaver, Lesley Jo
  2017 Tension Among Women in North India: An Idiom of Distress and a Cultural Syndrome. Culture,
         Medicine, and Psychiatry 41(1):35–55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11013-016-9516-5.
World Health Organization 2011 Mental Health Atlas: Liberia. Geneva. http://www.who.int/mental_
  health/evidence/atlas/profiles/lbr_mh_profile.pdf?ua=1.
Yang, Lawrence H., Michael R. Phillips, Graciete Lo, Yuwen Chou, Xiaoli Zhang, and Kim Hopper
  2010 Excessive Thinking’’; as Explanatory Model for Schizophrenia: Impacts on Stigma and Moral
         Status in Mainland China. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36(4):836–845. https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/
         sbn180.
                                                                                            123

